This live export ship should have never
been allowed to leave port.
>> Really safe.
Really, really safe.
>> And then we didn't get any other
messages.
>> And that was it.
>> That [music] was it. It's really hard to
live a life where you're constantly
questioning [music] something so tragic.
The story is a prime but unfortunate
example of a company in financial
[music] distress and the terrible
decisions that people make despite
having lives on the line.
>> My brother was Will Prize. He was a
stockman on live export ships.
Oh my god. I just got out of the water.
So, I'm just going to show you this
cave.
>> His travel was a real thing of the
family that we all loved.
Whenever he traveled, he'd send us
emails and always FaceTime us.
>> Hello, family. So, I've just arrived
uh to my workplace. this job came up to
[music] go on this boat for like a month
at a time to look after the cattle in
align with his travel and adventure
aspirations.
Live export is [music] any international
shipment transport of live animals
whether that's cattle, poultry, anything
[music] overseas from one country to
another by sea, by air or land.
A handful of countries dominate the live
export trade, including New Zealand and
Brazil. The world's largest exporter,
Australia, shipped [music] 2.4 million
animals in 2019.
It's a growing industry [music]
jumpstarted by demand from China over
the past decade for both meat and to
build out their farming production.
[music]
Other countries, particularly in the
Middle East and Southeast Asia, purchase
live animals because [music] of cultural
or religious preferences for fresh meat
or meat slaughtered a certain way.
The global shipping industry is worth
about $2 trillion.
In contrast, live export consists of 150
ships and [music] it generates the
estimate is 120 to $150 million.
Safety is a major issue with live
export. There was an investigation done
by the Guardian in 2020 that found
throughout the 2010s, [music]
the industry was two times as dangerous
as the rest of the global merchant
fleet. The average age for cargo vessels
is about 10 to 15 years old, whereas the
average age of [music] live export ships
is about 30 years old.
>> I'm Dr. Lynn Simpson and I'm an
Australian veterinarian.
In total, [music] I did 57 voyages,
mostly from Australia to the Middle
East, but also to Russia, Libya, Turkey,
Madagascar. Every ship leaving Australia
has to have an onboard veterinarian to
look after the animals [music] and to
report back to the government. The live
export trade is difficult for some
people to to visualize. So they're like
a multi-story car park. Each deck's the
same. It's concrete. It's cattle. It's
concrete. It's cattle. It's [music]
concrete. It's cattle. And the animals
don't have a great time. I don't believe
anyone can go through those voyages and
say we're doing the right thing by the
animals.
>> Oh yeah. Looks like a bit of a rust
bucket.
>> Golf livestock 1's life began in 2002 as
a cargo [music] ship. In 2015, the ship
was purchased by a Emirates-based
[music]
company, Golf Navigation. Mar Consult
out of Hamburg, Germany, managed the
ship. Since Golf Livestock One was
retrofitted [music] in 2015 to hold
about 475 livestock [music] pens, it had
myriad issues over the years, but in
2019 in particular, it started to have
very serious and quite frequent issues
that were flagged by various ports.
In August 2020, the delivery for Golf
Livestock Guan was a standard one to
pick up 6,000 [music] head of dairy
cattle and deliver to a port called Tang
Shen, China. They had a total crew of 43
39 Filipino crewmen, two Australians,
[music] and two New Zealanders.
>> Do you want to say something really
gross? Reallying gross.
when speaking to Will on the ship.
>> That's lovely.
>> Only really towards the end did he start
to see the dodgginess of what he was
actually doing in [music] those last few
days.
Yeah, it's actually really hard to talk
about because [snorts]
cuz I feel like so responsible for him
and I knew that he just wanted to get
off.
>> [snorts]
>> I could really sense it.
>> So, the ship leaves on August 14th. The
very next day, Captain A Doug reports
back [music] they're having engine
problems and it's going to take 6 to8
hours to repair.
For the next 2 weeks, not much is
reported [music] back to Mar Consult in
Germany. And then on August 28th,
Captain Adug received the first report
of a developing storm [music] in the
Philippine Sea. Marons did tell him take
any type of stringent maneuvers that he
deemed necessary in order to avoid
[music]
this weather system. They put the onus
on him.
>> Pretty wild weather.
Will just sent um a video message saying
this is what I opened the door to this
morning.
>> And that um that's just the water coming
through. So the swell must have been
massive.
>> And you said night little bro. I said
night bro. Stay safe out there in that
big ocean.
>> At that point I thought that's that was
just what it's like out there. But um
yeah that was the night before they went
through the middle of the typhoon.
>> [music]
>> On August 30th, this typhoon, now named
Mesa, is developing and it's getting
larger. It's it's going from a category
1 to a category 3. Wind speeds are
reaching 100 mph. Ships in the region
are all heading out of the way. It's
quite literally Golf Livestock Guan as
the only ship heading up through that
portion of the Philippine Sea directly
in the path of Mesa.
By dawn on September 1st, Typhoon Mesa
and Golf Livestock [music] One had
essentially converged. And yet, Captain
Ad's communications with Mar Consult
really betrayed the chaos that was going
on on board and at sea. The extent of
the [music] mechanical issue that
evening, September 1st, was a complete
engine shutdown. The ship drifted
without power in the middle of a
typhoon.
Leading into the early hours of
September 2nd, [music] while the ship
was still drifting against 40ft waves, a
huge wave hit and all communication
ended.
The ship disappeared in the East China
[music] Sea when it got caught up in a
typhoon while sailing from Napia to
China. The moment that I went to [music]
search first thing in the morning, pick
up my phone from my bedside table,
search results in Google said golf
[music] livestock one missing.
And from there it all kind [music] of
exploded.
>> I was woken up about 4 in the morning by
my sister. She was in [music] hysterics.
saying it's gone
and and I just I [music] just was like
it's probably it's not gone. It's there.
We just we just we just lost it on the
on the navigation.
>> We tried to use every avenue we could to
find out where Will was because there
was nothing.
>> A little after 1:00 a.m. on September
2nd, the Japanese Coast Guard received
the first of two pings from Golf [music]
Livestock 1's E-B system. On the
afternoon of the 2nd, Japanese Coast
Guard spotted a life raft and as they
got closer, they saw hands waving. And
that was Chief Engineer Eduardo Sereno.
>> Did you get some brother also in golf or
no?
>> I'm only one.
>> Only one.
>> Yes.
>> No other one.
>> Almost 2 days later, they spotted
another life raft. And in that raft was
crewman [music] Jel Rosales.
>> The Coast Guard says it will stop its
search on Sunday because there's another
typhoon on the way. Typhoon [music]
Haitian is due to hit the same area
where the ship went down. Japan Coast
Guard did reinitiate search and rescue.
But by then the search area was was so
diffuse [music] and they were finding so
little evidence of the ship. And by
September 9th, Japanese Coast Guard
officially called off the effort.
>> We saw how slowly things were moving. So
what we started to do was
>> [music]
>> um reach out to media to kind of just
get that story out here about what was
happening and what was needed. We were
able [music] to kind of put a task force
essentially amongst ourselves. Private
[music] searches with aviation, with
ferry boats, with local people. We found
[music] debris. We found all sorts of
things that kept leading us on. And I
think we were doing it for months and
months with [music] the possibility that
any of them were still out there.
The body of another Filipino crew member
was discovered in the water and the
remaining 40 crew members were never
found.
>> Throughout the entire process of
reporting this story, it was clear that
everything [music]
at every step of the way was shrouded in
some type of mystery.
>> Since Gulf Livestock 1 was flagged by
Panama, the country was in charge of
conducting the accident report.
Its investigators noted that Gulf
Navigation and MAR consult acted very
poorly in terms of providing them with
information. At that point, it was
really just about [music]
talking to people familiar with the
merchant maritime industry, which is
incredibly murky and vague and and
difficult to crack. And then I I
actually connected with a lawyer in the
Philippines um [music] who he he focuses
on seafarers connecting me with people
in the industry.
Over the years I was able to obtain key
documents that had not previously been
reviewed that shed a lot of light on
Golf Livestock 1's final months and sort
of just how fragile the ship was. All of
these mechanical failures should have
raised a red [music] flag at some point
and it didn't. So
what is critical about this document is
it highlights I think the lack of
communication that
was ongoing with regard to to Golf
Livestock One. This is an email that
[music] Captain Dante Adog sent one of
the the managers at Golf Navigation in
the days prior to the ship getting to
Napier New Zealand. A generator is
inoperable due to a defective seawater
cooling pump. But his his issue is that
no one at MAR consult has [music] gotten
back to him with regard to this problem.
You know your ship is ailing. your
bosses aren't giving you any guidance.
So he pushes forward.
These are the loading papers from Napier
or New Zealand. It tells us how much
weight in cattle fod there is and hay
and all these other things in water. The
average weight for the cows going on the
ship was 250 [music] kg.
Just like a boxer trying to make their
weigh in, a cattle exporter wants their
animals as light as possible when
they're loaded so more animals can fit
into a pen. To do this, exporters in New
Zealand were legally allowed to stop
feeding them for up to 12 hours.
>> They could be out by 10, 15%. That's
really critical for a floating feed lot
that you've got, you know, out on the
ocean. And this is the thing with
shipping. It's generally not one thing
that kills a sheep or that causes a big
catastrophe like this.
>> Once the cattle are on the ship, they
consume water, they consume feed, they
gain weight, they're redistributing the
weight of that water and that feed from
one part of the ship to another. It all
plays a critical role in the overall
stability of a ship. And when a ship
isn't stable, when it's ailing, and then
it goes into a storm, it really has no
chance. So what we know about Golf
Navigation at the time is that the
company was in financial crisis and you
see that reflected in the state of the
ship over the previous year. Uh with all
of the mechanical failures, with all of
the red flags, it was allowed to keep
going.
I believe they ran the gauntlet through
the the typhoon because they were being
pushed through other factors, [music] be
it feed, time, whatever. And then when
you hit that rough weather, it's not
just the rough weather that that causes
the the ship to go down. It's often
[music] preceded by a mechanical
failure.
>> The sinking of Gulf Livestock 1 was the
worst disaster in the history of the
live export trade. [music]
The incident added fuel to long-standing
efforts to shut down an industry seen
[music] by many as cruel to animals.
Various countries, including New
Zealand, reacted with bans.
>> The Gulf Livestock One sinking was a
tragedy that really brought a focus to
the potential dangers uh of the whole
trade. We'd seen images of concern uh in
2018. We had conducted an independent
inquiry in 2019. In April 2023, as
Minister of Agriculture, I announced and
legislated for the ban on the live
export of cattle from New Zealand. And
now we have a government coming in with
a promise of reinstatement. Most people
are horrified and indeed um are
concerned about New Zealand's
reputation.
>> Australia, however, decided to pursue
only a partial ban. The federal
government has announced Australia will
no longer export live sheep from May
2028.
>> The government said that decision was
based on welfare concerns during long
journeys to the Middle East. For now,
Prime Minister Anthony Albani has
promised not to ban cattle export.
Farmers and exporters in the Northern
Territory depend on the trade that ships
cattle on shorter trips to countries
like Indonesia and Vietnam.
>> [music]
>> Australia has some of the toughest and
strictest standards of all types of
shipping, not just livestock. The
standards for export of live cattle on
ships are excellent. There's free choice
of fresh water and fresh feed available
at all times. We actually have less
mortality on an annualized basis on a
ship than what we do in the paddic with
our production system. I think there is
more work to to be done in the court of
public opinion for animal production
globally, but also for live export and
at point of slaughter. It's important
that we're transparent about the
production of food.
The industry obviously needs to continue
shipping livestock and I think some
companies have taken steps to be safer.
They're operating only purpose-built
ships for live export. So, they're far
more stable than a converted vessel.
That's one of the key steps that the
industry can take to just make
everything a bit safer for everyone.
What we're seeing is the growing
awareness of [music] the dangerous
nature of these ships and the the high
risk of this trade. The live export of
animals, especially by sea, really only
results in suffering and stress for the
animals. [music] There are better ways
to do it. we can um transport genetics
like um embryos and semen if people want
breeding stock and that [music] the
majority of the if not all of the meat
trade that we have can be replaced with
frozen meat exports.
>> But of course as some companies scale
back on live export, other companies are
more than eager to to jump in and take
their place. Live export is growing in
South America, countries like Brazil,
Peru. They are exporting more and more
beef cattle to the Middle East and and
other places in the world. There's human
beings on these ships that are part of
this global commerce in [music] these
lightly regulated industries. It's a
question of who do you want regulating
an industry and an appetite that's not
going away.
[music] While some export companies are
taking advantage of newer ships that are
safer for both cargo and crew, others
will continue to rely on repurposed
vessels like [music] Gulf Livestock One.
>> Happy [singing and music] birthday
to you.
>> Hooray!
Hooray!
Everybody say
>> it's really hard
>> to live a life where you're constantly
[music]
questioning
something so tragic and it feels so
unjust.
>> Bye.
>> Hi.
>> Sometimes [music] I see someone who
looks like him in the street
and I think think it's him. So, it's
looked like it's like he he could pop up
at any moment
and then you have to realize he's gone.
[music]
There's half of you that is having a
really good life, but then there's the
other half who just crushed
and so that's really hard to live with.
I still don't really handle it very
well. Even using [music] past tense
feels so bizarre still
to lose lives like Will and the others
just I it feels so unjust.
>> [music]